---
layout: post
title:      "The Why Behind My Learning"
date:       2019-02-10 20:31:39 +0000
permalink:  the_why_behind_my_learning
---


	My movement toward the Flatiron program, and data science as a field, began with a frank conversation about life. At some point over the last several years I came to the realization that my professional path had not unfolded as my younger self might have planned. This was not entirely disheartening. Teenaged aspirations to become a socialist guerrilla revolutionary were, at the very least, imprudent. However, there were aspects of my early aspirations that I was sad to see left by the side of the road like a busted tire. 
	
	As a young man I had always dreamed of “working for myself” or more specifically “not being chained to an unloved job.” I spent many nights in college washing dishes or standing over the sour smell of a deep fryer, reflecting on my future. In these moments a determination grew in me to do work that was both meaningful and rewarding. This did not necessarily define the type of work I would be doing. Rather, it made it imperative to do work in which I could recognize the value, work that would bring real benefit to whatever organization, community, or field it occupied. Most of all, I wanted to find myself in a role where I could regularly be challenged, where I was forced to continue my education and mastery in order to accomplish the tasks before me.
	
	A decade removed from both college and the deep fryer, I did not find myself doing meaningful work, nor was I in a role where I felt particularly challenged. Instead, I found myself in a middle-management role at a medium-sized company where I earned an average living providing a routine effort. My job was not terrible. I worked with good people and understood that I performed a necessary function for the success of the business. But I knew, without being able to articulate exactly why, that this was not what I had set out to do.
	
	This realization brought about a great many more questions than answers. Paramount amongst them was *what* exactly I would rather be doing. In my thirties I am certainly a much more practical person, and so my stabs at an answer revolved around realistic, job-oriented possibilities. Law school, getting my PhD, becoming a trim carpenter—there were many avenues to a more meaningful work-life. And on my own I found myself flitting from one great idea to the next like a kid making a Christmas list. And so I turned to the best resource at my disposal—I asked my partner for advice. She in turn asked me what made me want to pursue or not pursue each of the options laid out before me. And what she saw was that one path made my eyes light up and my speech quicken with excitement: learning to code.
	
	This brought me half-way to the decision point. The second half was piecing through the various languages and landscapes of the development world. Front end or back end? Web design vs software development? On-campus school or internet-based bootcamp? Fortunately I had a guiding light when it came to navigating this decision. Over the past decade I had learned a valuable lesson when making business decisions. Data matters. Time and time again as I and other stakeholders had wrestled with decisions in the workplace (how much to buy, how much to make, what price point to pick, how to market, who to hire, etc.) the one thing that could universally be relied on to make the decision easier, more reliable, and more efficiently implemented, was having relevant data. And beyond that, having the data was only a half-cooked dinner. The data had to be organized and laid out so that it could be read and understood. The data had to be presented persuasively so that it didn’t lose out to hunches and anecdotal evidence. And beyond all that the data needed a knowledgeable advocate to demonstrate why *Data itself*, as a concept, was useful in conjunction with human experience and all the other bits of business acumen that come to the table.
	
	I had been as best a data champion as I could be, armed with only excel proficiency and some basic cloud-based software. But there was never a shortage of missed-opportunities or instances where my ability to find, filter, and put forth the right data fell short of the goal. But here was an answer to my question—not just data, data science. From here my interest and excitement blossomed
	
	There are seemingly infinite reasons to become more fluent in data science. Chief among them is that the number of data points, the sheer volume of data available to and useful for the modern individual, is growing exponentially every day. Most fields trend toward expertise. Astronomy, which helped us navigate the oceans, gave birth to astrophysics, which took men into space. In the same vein our understanding of data collection and computing is changing existing occupations and opening up new disciplines with new possibilities for prediction and pattern recognition across all knowledge-based fields.
	
	There is no doubt that data science is a path where I can find worthwhile work. It is easy to see the value in the tasks data scientists undertake each day, from the profit maximizing aims of the finance and corporate worlds, to the more human-oriented goals put forward by medicine, university research institutions, and the tech sector. But most of all, the field of data science promises to offer an unending opportunity for challenge and growth. The very nature of data science implies an adaptive and evolving occupation that seeks to take advantage of the latest breakthroughs in technology and machine learning, in statistical modeling and mathematical ingenuity, and in the good old-fashioned grind of human curiosity in search of better ways to understand ourselves and the world around us.
	    
